---
layout: page
title: Why we should allow kids to scribble
date: 2013-11-23 10:31:00
---

I was watching my 7 months old baby playing with his toy, the one with humpteen number of mild to brilliant traces of colours<!--rm-->. Every time I showed him the toy he picked it up with a fresh look without a hint of boredom. Of course he is only 7 months, he could easily forget the toy he played with just few minutes ago. But one thing knocked my mind, he was enjoying the colours and touch of the toy. He was treating his senses with colours, textures, sounds and actually enjoying it. And now he has got plenty of time to play, eat and sleep. What would happen when he moves on his growth ladder?. Possibly his eating, sleeping and playing pattern changes but does this exploring part also changes? I'm afraid it may drastically change. And why? Is that because he stops exploring as he grows? I don't think so. If not nurtured to explore he might stop it entirely. I didn't teach my 7m+ to wonder a toy but he does. Exploring is a natural process. Then why not encourage it all time! what stops is inadequate attention given to such small act of exploring, and reasons? -  no time and patience.

Here goes another story, I have a niece (a naughty one) who asks questions every second and each one is throughly valid and you cannot answer her with a lie. If done, there you are with another package of questions! Once she was asking me a question which sounded silly to me but when I started answering her question so many things came popping in my mind that I started realising the weightage of a silly question and her critical thinking. but at the same time was worried that she might not ask such questions when she goes higher levels in school and college. (OK, I am intending here to corner educational system. Actually we cannot point finger to one system alone. And moreover, they provide just another business service and also you can't expect your child go bright with just education. I don't seriously think just learning maths, science and languages makes your kid brilliant. It's just what has been discovered so far.what we need to do is experiment with available facts to find new one! And sadly, kids are not nurtured to invent any.)

Why do kids stop asking questions as they grow. One reason might be, they don't want to be criticised for their question. Shy and fear of being branded as silly questioner. I believe long term effect of this fear may leave them with so many questions unanswered and to the worst, wrong assumptions to their questions.

Few things we might do while raising kids:

- Don't rely on schools. They are just information banks and don't make kids brilliant.
- Cultivate the habit of reading, show all faces of world to them. And don't stop with just getting them books, but read with them and discuss the characters, stories and take aways from the books in detail. It nurtures their critical thinking and creativity. Just reading a story doesn't stimulate them. Also as they grow, don't restrict the reading time.
- Don't pamper the kids. Kids are adorable, sweet but the world is not. Teach them how to survive smartly.(not cunningly:) ). Show them the best of both worlds. So many things have come up to fool us through different channels. One such thing is "advertisement", don't get them whatever appears enticing in TV screens to make them happy (at least,not always). Actually you give them unhealthy lifestyle by doing it. Nobody knows how this small act of getting them whatever they want can change their way of looking world. Nothing should be given for free, even knowledge. Don't throw easy in their hands. Those who seek it, earn it. right!
- Teach them etiquettes, manners and respect for elders. It really pays! One thing we all will come to realise is our kids behave different in school and home. know why, it's controlled and uncontrolled surrounding. It doesn't mean we have to be controlling our kids, just ensure they go with certain manners all the time and when they don't, be strict with it. Give them limited independence. Don't give them a chance to take advantage of your emotional weakness.
- And allow them to explore all the time. Show them how scribbling can be disciplined to writing. Don't stop their scribbling, Guide them. whatever you teach them, teach them right way. Encourage them to ask questions, no matter how silly it is and sow deep in them that fear is illusion.
